# 6.1 Convention and Standards

## 6.1.1 Convention followed

Definition extracted from the [RFC2119](https://www.ietf.org/rfc/rfc2119.txt ). 
1. SHALL: This word, mean that the definition is an absolute requirement of the specification.
2. SHALL NOT: This phrase, mean that the definition is an absolute prohibition of the specification.
3. SHOULD: This word, mean that there may exist valid reasons in particular circumstances to ignore a particular item, but the full implications must be understood and carefully weighed before choosing a different course.
4. SHOULD NOT: This phrase means that there may exist valid reasons in particular circumstances when the particular behavior is acceptable or even useful, but the full implications should be understood and the case carefully weighed before implementing any behavior described with this label.
5. MAY: This word, mean that an item is truly optional.  One vendor may choose to include the item because a particular marketplace requires it or because the vendor feels that it enhances the product while another vendor may omit the same item. An implementation which does not include a particular option MUST be prepared to interoperate with another implementation which does include the option, though perhaps with reduced functionality. In the same vein an implementation which does include a particular option SHALL be prepared to interoperate with another implementation which does not include the option (except, of course, for the feature the option provides.)

## 6.1.2 Standards usage

Due to its importance in the future European Health Data Space, the FLUTE project:
SHOULD use the HL7 FHIR standard whenever possible.
SHOULD also use SNOMED CT, LOINC and UCUM terminologies whenever possible
SHOULD use DICOMweb (DICOM) for imaging evidences
_Context_: As a European project, the FLUTE project intends to participate to the standardization of the European Health Data Space (EHDS). The HL7 FHIR standard has been selected as a strong contender for future primary use cases of the [EHDS](https://health.ec.europa.eu/system/files/2023-01/ehealth_20221107_sr_en.pdf). For images, DICOM is the format to be supported.
